[Music]
five other factors in addition to the
war Navy and Justice Department
intelligence organizations there were
also various federal investigative
agencies which during and immediately
after the war engaged in activities
bearing upon the intelligence function
but not clearly resulting in an
intelligence product by authority of its
Organic Act 22 statute 403 of 1883 the
Civil Service Commission was empowered
indeed required to make investigations
in the enforcement of its rules trained
personnel however were not immediately
available for this task quote without a
staff of investigators the Civil Service
Commission couldn't make any personal
investigations to determine the
character or fitness of the job
applicants the commissioners had to rely
on questionnaires filled out by the job
hunters and vouchers certifying they
were of good moral character in 1913
however Congress for the first time
allowed the Commission to hire
investigators to get trained men the
Commission tapped the Postal Inspection
Service for for investigators who
concentrated mainly on charges of
misconduct in 1917 President Wilson made
the first stab at the type of
investigation that occupies most of the
time of the civil service Commission's
sleuths today he issued an order
requiring the Commission to investigate
the experience fitness character success
and adaptability of applicants for the
job of postmaster where the incumbent
was not to be reappointed for the first
time the investigators were to look
behind the answers on questionnaires and
make personal investigations into the
background of the job seekers end quote
footnote Miriam Ottenberg the federal
investigators Englewood Cliffs
prentice-hall 1962 pages 232 through to
33 and footnote it was also in 1917 that
the chief executive by confidential
directive instructed the Commission to
quote room
move any employee when the retention of
such employee would be inimical to the
public welfare by reasons of his conduct
sympathies or utterances or because of
other reasons growing out of the war
such removal may be made without other
formality than that the reasons shall be
made a matter of confidential record
subject however to inspection by the
Civil Service Commission end quote
commenting on the Commission's
operationalization of this authority one
expert in this policy area has said
quote the Civil Service Commission
assumed the power to refuse all
applications for employment if there was
a reasonable belief that this
appointment was inimical to the public
interest owing to lack of loyalty its
agents conducted 135 loyalty
investigations in 1917 and 2530 seven
more in 1918 in the latter year 660
applicants were d barred from federal
employment for questionable loyalty a
tiny percentage of the total of federal
workers but there were many agencies not
under Commission control and thousands
of loyalty investigations were conducted
by other internal security agencies
despairing of slow civil service
recruiting practices federal departments
employed tens of thousands of workers
outside civil service procedures with
the result that the established loyalty
regulations were only partially
effective in their coverage and quote
footnote Hyman page 269 the portion of
the president's confidential directive
quoted above appears pages 268 through
269 in footnote this type of
investigation virtually ceased with the
end of the war the Commission did
however continued its inquiries into the
fitness and character of certain new
applicants such as those seeking
postmaster positions and loyalty
Security checks would not enter
consideration again until warfare once
more engulfed Europe footnote the most
ambitious loyalty security program was
established after World War two C
Eleanor Bontecou
the federal loyalty security program
Ithaca
Cornell University Press 1953 and
footnote quote the new kind of
investigative work prompted the
Commission to establish a separate
division of intelligence and review in
1920 the following year the President
ordered the Civil Service Commission to
investigate post masters for
reappointment as well as for their
original appointment law enforcement
officers were the next to come under the
personal scrutiny of the civil service
Commission's investigators when Congress
in 1927 brought all positions in the
Bureau of prohibition into the
classified civil service the Commission
decided the prohibition enforcers should
be investigated because of the special
temptations that came their way to carry
out this chore the Commission hastily
recruited and trained forty
investigators in two years
the investigators completed more than
3,000 investigations into the background
of Bureau of prohibition employees the
results were startling about 40% of
those investigated including many
already working for the Bureau of
prohibition had records which showed
them unfit for Federal service the
Commission with the blessing of Congress
decided it had better take a look into
the background of other law enforcement
officers it doubled its investigative
staff and started making personal
investigations of customs inspectors and
border patrolmen by 1939 the
Commission's investigative program
required investigations of the character
and fitness of job applicants wherever
practice about since its sites were set
higher than its funds however it could
only use its authority to check on the
background of those going into key
positions up to this time the question
of loyalty to the government had been
recognized as something to consider but
it hadn't played a major part in
investigations Congress and the
Commission had been more concerned with
cleaning up political favoritism and
federal jobs and rooting out criminal
elements and grafters
footnote Ottenberg pages 233 and 234 and
footnote on the eve of World War 2 the
Civil Service Commission had both the
techniques and available loyalty
security files to again screen federal
employees the files could have been
scrutinized by other government agencies
and pursuit of an intelligence objective
or utilized by the Commission itself to
contribute to an intelligence product it
would seem quite apparent in any regard
that the Commission's investigative
files had a potential for intelligence
matters the post office department
temporarily established in 1789 and
given cabinet status in 1872 also
developed the potential for providing an
intelligence product with regard to both
criminal detection and internal security
matters investigations on behalf of this
agency traced their origins to the pre
federal era when Benjamin Franklin
appointed postmaster general by the
Continental Congress created the
position of surveyor of the post office
the predecessor to modern postal
inspectors when Congress created the
chief post office inspector position in
1880 a force of 90 men were ready for
investigative duties within the
department footnote of related interest
see EJ Kahn jr. fraud New York Harper &
row 1973 P H Woodward the Secret Service
of the post office department Hartford
Connecticut winter and Company 1886 and
footnote prior to World War one the
inspectors cooperated with the Treasury
and Justice Department's in preventing
frauds against the government robberies
of mail and other crimes within the
federal purview and postal service
jurisdiction during the war inspectors
assisted the military and naval
authorities and the Justice Department
and monitoring foreign mail traffic and
identifying espionage networks to the
extent that an information store was
maintained on these criminal and
security matters such materials would
seem to have a potential for
contributing to an intelligence
as in the case of the Civil Service
Commission these holdings could have
been examined by other government
agencies in pursuit of an intelligence
objective or utilized by the post office
department itself for such purpose from
the earliest days of the Republic
special care had been taken to protect
American diplomatic communications
through the use of codes and ciphers the
creation of secure facilities and
qualification tests for all persons
entrusted with such communicates quote
it took the 20th century however with
its international stresses and hot and
cold Wars to propel the State Department
into establishing a security force in
1916 Secretary of State Robert Lansing
created a Bureau of secret intelligence
headed by a chief special agent it was
such a hush-hush outfit that the chief
special agent drew his operating funds
from a confidential account and even
paid his agents by personal check the
chief special agents job was to advise
the Secretary of State on matters of
intelligence and security by 1921 his
staff amounted to 25 men one of the
first problems of these special agents
involved passports and visas beginning
in 1914 European nations began demanding
proof of identity the United States had
previously issued passports on request
but most people didn't bother to get
them with the outbreak of World War one
United States missions abroad were
authorized to issue emergency passports
but by the end of 1918 Congress passed a
law requiring every departing American
to have a passport from the State
Department and every alien to show a
passport from his homeland and a visa
from one of our consular offices before
he could enter this country
the chief special agents force started
sorting out American communists seeking
passports for trips to Moscow and Soviet
agents using fraudulent passports
through the 1920s and 1930s the State
Department investigators uncovered
passport frauds worldwide in scope and
involving chains of subversive agents on
four continents
the investigators pinned down the Soviet
use of American passports taken from
American volunteers in the Spanish Civil
War exposed several elaborate passport
frauds to supply traveling communists
and boarded at least two Nazi espionage
plots centering on the use of American
passports with the outbreak of World War
two the chief special agents office was
expanded to cope with the problem of
interning and exchanging diplomatic
officials of enemy powers and screening
Americans or those claiming American
citizenship after they were expatriated
from enemy controlled areas end quote
granted Authority in 1863 to appoint no
more than three revenue agents the
Treasury Department by the time of
American entry into World War one had a
variety of investigative arms each with
a potential for contributing to the
intelligence effort in addition to the
Customs Division the Secret Service
gathered information pursuant to its
mission of protecting the president
conducted security investigations of
government and war production facilities
made loyalty checks on the employees of
some agencies cooperated with the Food
Administration and war trade ward in
uncovering violations of the food and
fuel Control Act and uncovered
fraudulent activities in connection with
war risk insurance often during the war
years the Secret Service and Justice
Department's Bureau of Investigation
duplicated each other's efforts and
quarreled over jurisdictions Treasury
secretary McAdoo also vigorously
protested the use of the Secret Service
referent on American Protective League
badges and documents arguing that the
Attorney General should halt this
practice by his Auxiliary allies
in his disputes with justice over these
various matters secretary McAdoo had
proposed the creation of a Central
Intelligence Agency to coordinate the
various intelligence activities and
operations occurring during the war
additional wartime taxes and controls on
the production of distilled spirits and
intoxicating liquors also added to the
Treasury Department's surveillance
duties quote internal revenues
intelligence division started out more
as a weapon against corruption within
the service than crime without early in
1919 commissioner of internal review
Daniel C Roper who later became
Secretary of Commerce began to hear
sordid complaints that some of his tax
collecting employees were taking bribes
or extorting money from tax payers mr.
Roper had previously served as first
assistant Postmaster General and knew
the work of the postal inspectors in
ferreting out dishonest employees as
well as mail fraud he wanted a similar
unit in Internal Revenue and he wanted
to man it with postal inspectors on July
1st 1919 six postal inspectors were
transferred to the Bureau of Internal
Revenue
their assignment to investigate serious
violations of Revenue laws through
collusion conspiracy extortion bribery
or any other manipulation aimed at
defrauding the government of taxes end
quote
during the war the Justice Department
board the responsibility of controlling
aliens and alien property the Bureau of
Immigration and Naturalization then
located in the Department of Labor
apparently had no investigators as such
of its own and seems to have utilized
agents from the Justice Department's
Bureau of Investigation to monitor
espionage suspects entering the United
States as aliens the Secret Service
also is active in alien surveillance
within the Justice Department there was
established under the authority of the
trading with the enemy Act an office of
alien property custodian which was to
receive administer and account for money
and property within the United States
belonging to a declared enemy
or Ally of such enemy a mitchell Palmer
held the custodians position until he
became Attorney General in 1919 and
Francis P Garvin took over the duties of
the office the unit had its own
investigation bureau created shortly
after the agency was established which
lasted until 1921 as noted with other
investigative bodies the office of alien
property custodian had a potential for
contributing to an intelligence product
but it is not known to what extent if
any such actually occurred there is also
evidence of some type of intelligence
activity on the part of the federal
government with regard to foreign trade
after the United States formally entered
the war the president in August 1917
created the exports Administrative Board
which replaced the exports licenses
division of the Commerce Department to
administer and execute the laws relating
to the licensing of exports the board
had a war trade intelligence section
which apparently did some investigative
work in October 1917 the war trade board
was created succeeding the exports
Administrative Board three days after
this entity came into being a war trade
Intelligence Bureau was established to
replace the war trade intelligence
section of the EAB
the duties of the bureau were to
determine the enemy or non enemy status
or affiliations of persons trading with
any individual or firm in the United
States to supply the enemy trade Bureau
with information concerning applicants
for licences to trade with the enemy and
to act as a clearinghouse for war trade
intelligence for the United States and
his allies once again the intelligence
potential for such an investigative body
is recognized but its actual
contribution to an intelligence product
cannot be determined in May of 1919 the
Intelligence Bureau was absorbed by the
enemy trade Bureau and a month later the
entire war trade board was transferred
to the State Department
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you